% Hosting Git Repositories

include sidebar-toc

<div style="overflow: auto">

<div class="fl-r" style="width: 25%">

<hr> @@red(**Looking for the old "Notes on Git" page?  Click
[here](../index2.html)**.)@@ <hr>

</div>

Gitolite allows you to setup git hosting on a central server, with
fine-grained access control and many more powerful features.

</div>

# download {#dl -}

Gitolite can be downloaded from `git://github.com/sitaramc/gitolite` or
`https://code.google.com/p/gitolite/`.

If your Unix-fu and ssh-fu are good, installing gitolite is as simple as
copying your public key over to the hosting user, and running a couple of
commands, as the [quick install][qi] section of the install page shows.

# documentation {#rtfm -}

<div class="green box-r" style="padding: 10px">

**New (April 2014): There's a [book on gitolite][book] out**.  I've received
some emails over the years asking where to donate for gitolite to show your
appreciation, and I've always refused politely.  Well, if you insist... buy
the book :-)

</div>

Gitolite has a lot of features, and consequently a lot of documentation.

This page (the one you're reading) is the main page.  It, as well as most
other pages, should have a "Gitolite table of contents" along the right
margin (possibly preceded by a "Page table of contents").

If you're not sure where to start, read the main page and the overview page,
then look over the rest of the table of contents to decide.

## (reading order and forward references) {#fr -}

I've tried hard to make the documentation readable in a straight sequence,
using the "Gitolite TOC" on the right side.  Of course there are places where
I have no choice but to refer or link to something that has not been
encountered yet, but generally you can ignore those links on a first pass
through the documentation.

<!-- Finally, there's also an [all-in-one page](gitolite.html).  If you're looking -->
<!-- for some word/phrase but forgot which page it was mentioned in, you can load -->
<!-- the all-in-one-page and use your browser's Ctrl-F (find in page) function. -->

# troubleshooting {#trouble -}

If you're having trouble, please try the following resources first:

*   The [emergencies][] page helps with all sorts of install/setup issues,
    recovering from lost keys and other self-inflicted wounds, lists some
    common (and some uncommon!) errors and non-standard configs that may trip
    you up.
*   The [idiot-proof setup][ips] is a very detailed page that shows one
    fool-proof way to install, as long as you follow instructions faithfully!
*   And finally, for specific post-install issues, perhaps the [cookbook][]
    has a recipe just for you?

# contact and support {#contact -}

## email {-}

Unless you're reporting what you think is a security issue, please use the
mailing list for all communication.  (**NOTE**: The first email from a new
member is held until I can clear it; subsequent emails from the same email
address do not get held up).

  * Mailing list for support and general discussion:
      * Post: gitolite@googlegroups.com
      * Subscribe: gitolite+subscribe@googlegroups.com

If you don't want to participate in the discussions and only want to be
informed of releases, security announcements, etc., you can subscribe to the
announce list.  This is a one-way list; only I can post to it.

  * Mailing list for announcements and notices:
      * Subscribe: gitolite-announce+subscribe@googlegroups.com

@@red(If you think you found a **security issue**, please email me directly:
sitaramc@gmail.com or sitaram@atc.tcs.com.)@@

If you wish to send me code, please see the file called CONTRIBUTING in the
source distribution.

## IRC {-}

We're on irc at #gitolite on freenode.  I live in India (UTC+0530 time zone),
but there are a few regulars (*thanks, guys, you know who you are!*) from
other times zones.  That said, it's not heavy traffic and you may have to wait
a while for an answer, depending on the time of day and day of week.

There are also a few gitolite-knowledgeable people on the git channel #git.

# license {#license -}

The gitolite software is copyright Sitaram Chamarty and is licensed under the
GPL v2; please see the file called COPYING in the source distribution.

This **documentation**, which is maintained separately from the main gitolite
source code, is copyright Sitaram Chamarty and is provided under a [Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported
License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).

However, certain parts are contributed by others who may have chosen other
licenses; their names and license will be mentioned in the respective files.

Documentation for a software product will naturally contain code examples.  I
believe that the principle of fair use should cover use of those snippets; see
especially factors 3 and 4 in the list of factors
[here](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fair_use#Fair_use_under_United_States_law).

If you're not convinced that it would be fair use, then you may consider those
code snippets, as well as associated "comments" if any, to be under the GPLv2
license.  Licensing is about intent, and the intent of these examples is that
you use them wherever and however you can use gitolite itself.

>   <hr>
>   <center>**NOTE**: GIT is a trademark of Software Freedom Conservancy and my use of
>   "Gitolite" is under license.</center>
>   <hr>

[basic]: basic.html
[advanced]: advanced.html
[book]: http://www.packtpub.com/gitolite-essentials/book

<script type="text/javascript">
<!--
    window.onload = function() {
        hide_show('GTOC')
    }
-->
</script>
