# gitolite performance

TOP TIP: If you have more than 2000 or so repos, then you should be using v3.2
or later; there was a bit of code that went in there that makes a *huge*
difference for really large sites.

## tips for performance worriers

Gitolite is pretty efficient in most cases, and generally nothing needs to be
done.  If you think you have a performance problem, let me know on the mailing
list.  Meanwhile, here are some tips:

  * Look in the gitolite log file after any operation that you think ran
    slowly.  In particular, pushing to the admin repo, or a user creating a
    new wild repo, might be a little slow, and the log file will tell you a
    bit more detail on what took time.

  * If you don't use gitweb or git-daemon, or use them but are perfectly happy
    to control access to them from outside gitolite, you can comment out the
    corresponding lines in the POST\_CREATE and POST\_COMPILE trigger lists in
    the rc file.

  * If you can't get rid of those scripts, and they are still taking too long,
    you can make them run in the background.  They'll eventually finish but
    the user doesn't have to wait.  See src/triggers/bg.  *This should not
    normally be needed; if you feel you need it, please talk to me so I can
    understand why and maybe help*.

  * If you're more concerned about your users' time when they create a new
    wild repo (and not so much about the admin push taking time), you can fix
    a couple of scripts and send me a patch :)

    Here's the scoop:

    Scripts invoked via `POST_CREATE` *do* get information about what repo has
    just been created.  However, the gitweb and daemon scripts are not set to
    take advantage of this, only the git-config one is.  So use the git-config
    script as an example, and/or read the [triggers][] documentation, and fix
    the other two programs.

    (This should be easy enough for the daemon update, but the gitweb update
    may be a little more tricky, since it may involve *deleting* lines from
    the "projects.list" file.)

## why there's really no need to worry!

In general, gitolite has a constant overhead of about 0.2 seconds on my
laptop.  There really is nothing to optimise, but you can comment out some
triggers as the previous section said.

Here's the big-O stuff:

  * N = number of normal repos, each with its own set of rules.  In `repo r1
    r2 r3`, N = 3.  Add up all such lines.
  * G = number of groups or wild patterns.  In `repo @g1 @g2 foo/[a-z]*`, G =
    3.
  * M = number of members.  In `@g1 = r1 r2 <nl> @g2 = r3 r4 r5`, M = 5.
  * A = average number of rule lines in each "repo" block.  Usually about 5,
    maybe 10 sometimes.  You may have more.

Gitolite overheads compared to a normal ssh push are:

1.  perl startup time.  Fairly constant and fairly small.  I have generally
    found it pretty hard to measure, especially with a hot cache.
2.  rule parse time.  Details below
3.  rule interpretation time.  Fairly constant, or at least subject to much
    smaller variations than #2.

"rule parse time" is where it makes a difference.  There are 2 files gitolite
parses on each "access": `~/.gitolite/conf/gitolite.conf-compiled.pm` and
`~/repositories/your_repo.git/gl-conf`.  The former contains O(N + M + G*A)
lines.  In addition, the gl-conf files contains about "A" lines (remember we
called it an average), which is negligible.

In practice, you can't measure this at a scale that a developer running a "git
push" might even pretend to notice, unless you have more than, say, 5000 repos
or so.  On my testbed of 11,100 repos, where the compiled.pm is almost 0.7 MB,
it takes less than 0.2 seconds to do this.

And on a busy system, when that file will be pretty much always in cache, it's
even less.

## the only thing that will take more time

Literally, the only thing that will take time is something like "ssh git@host
info" because it finds all possible repos and for each of them it tries to
check the access.  On that same test bed, therefore, this ends up reading all
11,100 "gl-conf" files.

On my laptop this takes about 14 seconds.  In contrast, a normal git operation
(clone, pull, push, etc) is so small it is hard to measure without software.
