<!-- options: toc -->

% Before you start...

include sidebar-toc

This page talks about what you need to make sure you have before you install
gitolite.  For most people, this is not a big deal, but please read through it
anyway.  If you want to make sure, there's a section on trying it out safely.

# your skills

  * If you're installing gitolite, you're a "system admin", like it or not.
    Since most people use the ssh mode, **[ssh][]** is therefore a necessary
    skill.  Please take the time to learn at least enough to get passwordless
    access working.

  * You also need to be somewhat familiar with git itself.  You cannot
    administer a whole bunch of git repositories if you don't know the basics
    of git.

    Please make sure you understand at least the following concepts: *bare
    versus non-bare repos, cloning a repo, making changes and committing them,
    pushing commits to a 'remote', the special remote called 'origin',
    difference between a fast-forward push and a rewind push, 'refs' (i.e.,
    branches and tags)*.

    It also helps to understand git's hooks mechanism, git-config, and so on.

  * Some familiarity with Unix and shells is probably required.

  * [Regular expressions][regex] are a big part of gitolite in many places but
    familiarity is not necessary to do *basic* access control.

# your server

  * Any Unix system with a posix compatible "sh" and a **sane** file system.
  * Git version 1.6.6 or later.
  * Perl 5.8.8 or later.
  * Openssh (almost any version).  Optional if you're using [smart
    http][http].
  * A dedicated Unix userid to be the hosting user, usually "git" but it can
    be any user, even your own normal one.  (If you're using an RPM/DEB the
    install probably created one called "gitolite").

# you and your users' clients

  * Openssh client.
  * Git 1.6.6 or later.  Almost any git client will work, as long as it knows
    how to use ssh keys and send the right one along.

# cautions and caveats

**Please take note of the following points**:

  * If you're bringing existing repos into gitolite, please see
    [this][existing] first.

  * Gitolite expects all the directories and files it manages/uses to be owned
    by the [hosting user][hu] and not have strange permissions and ownerships.

  * Gitolite does NOT like it if you fiddle with [files and directories it
    cares about][files] in any way except as directed in the documentation.

  * Gitolite depends on several system-installed packages: openssh, git, perl,
    sh being the main ones.  They should all be configured sensibly and with
    most of the normal defaults.  (For example, if your sshd config says the
    authorized keys file should be placed in some directory other than the
    default, expect trouble).

@@gray((For your entertainment, [here][no-way] are some requests I have
refused over the years).)@@

# trying out gitolite safely {#trying}

If you're not sure if gitolite is right for you or your system, it's easy to
take it for a trial run, in ssh mode, and play with all of its features
(except mirroring).  This is very safe, and does not affect anything on your
system permanently.

<font color="red">**WARNING: this will clobber [these files and
directories][clobber] in your `$HOME`.  Ideally, you should use a throwaway
userid**.</font>

Just create a **throw-away userid**, log in to it, then run these commands:

    git clone git://github.com/sitaramc/gitolite
    cd gitolite
    prove t/ssh*

You will get an error that forces you to read `t/README` and set an env var
before the test can proceed.  This is intentional; I've had people who don't
pay attention to the "data loss" warning, and then complain that it was not
prominent enough.  Forcing them to read a much smaller page appears to focus
their attention better!

If it doesn't work, re-read this page to see if you may have missed something
that gitolite requires, or ask for [support][contact].

If it works, you get a gitolite installation with 7 gitolite users ("admin",
and "u1" through "u6").

Don't forget that the client and the server are all on the same user on the
same machine; we're *simulating* 7 gitolite users using ssh keys!  (How?
Maybe `~/.ssh/config` will give you a hint).

URLs look like `user:repo`, so for example you can clone the admin repo by
`git clone admin:gitolite-admin`.  Remote commands look like `ssh u1 info`.

So start by cloning the admin repo, and try out whatever you want!
