% trying out gitolite safely

# trying out gitolite {#trying}

<font color="red">**WARNING: this will clobber [these files and
directories][clobber] in your `$HOME`.  If in doubt, use a throwaway
userid**.</font>

It's easy to take gitolite for a trial run, in ssh mode, and play with all of
its features (except mirroring).

Create a **throw-away userid**, log in to it, then run these commands:

    git clone git://github.com/sitaramc/gitolite
    cd gitolite
    prove t/ssh*

You will get an error that forces you to read `t/README` and set an env var
before the test can proceed.  This is intentional; I've had people who don't
pay attention to the "data loss" warning, and then complain that it was not
prominent enough.  Forcing them to read a much smaller document appears to
focus their attention better!

If it doesn't work, read the testing section below to see if your system
satisfies the conditions required for doing this.

If it works, you get a gitolite installation with 7 gitolite users ("admin",
and "u1" through "u6").

Don't forget that the client and the server are all on the same user on the
same machine; we're *simulating* 7 gitolite users using ssh keys!  (How?
Maybe `~/.ssh/config` will give you a hint).

URLs look like `user:repo`, so for example you can clone the admin repo by
`git clone admin:gitolite-admin`.  Remote commands look like `ssh u1 info`.

So start by cloning the admin repo, and try out whatever you want!

# testing gitolite

<font color="red">**WARNING: this will clobber [these files and
directories][clobber] in your `$HOME`.  If in doubt, use a throwaway
userid**.</font>

Trying out gitolite safely is really a subset of running the test suite.  If
you want to run the full test suite, just do as above, except instead of
running `prove t/ssh*` you just run `prove`.

The test suite should run fine on most recent Linuxes and Unixes.  Although
gitolite itself should work fine with any git after 1.6.6 or so, the test
suite requires git 1.7.8 or later.

Make sure:

  * `$HOME/bin` is in `$PATH`
  * sshd allows incoming ssh to this userid, at least from localhost

Gitolite's test suite is mostly written using [tsh][] -- the "testing shell".
Take a look at some of the scripts and you will see what it looks like.  It
has a few quirks and nuances, but it's fine for what I need here.

[tsh]: http://github.com/sitaramc/tsh

The tests also use a somewhat convoluted system of environment variables in
order to run *entirely* as a local user, without going through ssh at all.
This lets a complete test suite run in about a fifth or less of the time it
would otherwise take.

If you think that defeats the purpose of the testing, you haven't read
[this][auth] yet.

# appendix a -- the clobber list {#clobber}

When you use either of these methods (i.e., trying out gitolite or running the
test suite), the following files and directories in your \$HOME are
potentially clobbered.

    .gitconfig
    .gitolite/
    .gitolite.rc
    projects.list
    repositories/
    .ssh/
