# gitolite triggers

<!-- pandoc: toc -->

## intro and sample rc excerpt

Gitolite fires off external commands at several different times.  The [rc][]
file specifies what commands to run at each trigger point, but for
illustration, here's an excerpt.  **Note that as of v3.4, this is *not* how
the rc file looks like externally.  Please see [this][addtrig] for more**.

    %RC = (

        <...several lines later...>

        # comment out or uncomment as needed
        # these will run in sequence after post-update
        POST_COMPILE                =>
            [
                'post-compile/ssh-authkeys',
                'post-compile/update-git-configs',
                'post-compile/update-gitweb-access-list',
                'post-compile/update-git-daemon-access-list',
            ],

        # comment out or uncomment as needed
        # these will run in sequence after a new wild repo is created
        POST_CREATE                 =>
            [
                'post-compile/update-git-configs',
                'post-compile/update-gitweb-access-list',
                'post-compile/update-git-daemon-access-list',
            ],

(As you can see, post-create runs 3 programs that also run from post-compile.
This is perfectly fine, by the way)

## types of trigger programs

There are two types of trigger programs.  Standalone scripts are placed in
src/triggers or its subdirectories.  They are invoked by being added to a
trigger list (using the path after "src/triggers/", as you can see).  Such
scripts are quick and easy to write in any language of your choice.

Triggers written as perl modules are placed in src/lib/Gitolite/Triggers.
They are invoked by being listed with the package+function name, although even
here the 'Gitolite::Triggers' part is skipped.  Perl modules have to follow
some conventions (see some of the shipped modules to ideas) but the advantage
is that they can set environment variables and change the argument list of the
gitolite-shell program that invokes them.

If this does not make sense, please examine a default install of gitolite,
paying attention to:

  * the path names in various trigger lists in the rc file
  * corresponding path names in the src/ directory in gitolite source
  * and for perl modules, the package names and function names within.

## manually firing triggers

...from the server command line is easy.  For example:

    gitolite trigger POST_COMPILE

However if the triggered code depends on arguments (see next section) this
won't work.  (The `POST_COMPILE` trigger programs all just happen to not
require any arguments, so it works).

## common arguments

Triggers receive the following arguments:

1.  any arguments mentioned in the rc file (for an example, see the renice
    command)

2.  the name of the trigger as a string (example, `"POST_COMPILE"`), so you
    can call the same program from multiple triggers and it can know where it
    was called from,

3.  followed by zero or more arguments specific to the trigger, as given in
    the next section.

## trigger-specific arguments and other details

Here are the **rest of** the arguments for each trigger, plus a brief
description of when the trigger runs.  (Note that when the repo name is passed
in as an argument, it is without the '.git' suffix).

  * `INPUT` runs before pretty much anything else.  INPUT trigger scripts
    *must* be in perl, since they manipulate the arguments to and the
    environment of the 'gitolite-shell' program itself.  Most commonly they
    will read/change `@ARGV`, and/or `$ENV{SSH_ORIGINAL_COMMAND}`.

    There are certain conventions to adhere to; please see some of the shipped
    samples or ask me if you need help writing your own.

  * `ACCESS_1` runs after the first access check.  Extra arguments:
      * repo
      * user
      * 'R' or 'W'
      * 'any'
      * result (see notes below)

    'result' is the return value of the access() function.  If it contains the
    uppercase word "DENIED", the access was rejected.  Otherwise it is the
    refex that caused the access to succeed.

    *Please note that if access is rejected, gitolite-shell will die as soon
    as it returns from the trigger*.

  * `ACCESS_2` runs after the second access check, which is invoked by the
    update hook to check the ref.  Extra arguments:
      * repo
      * user
      * any of W, +, C, D, WM, +M, CM, DM
      * the ref being updated (e.g., 'refs/heads/master')
      * result
      * old SHA
      * new SHA

    `ACCESS_2` also runs on each [VREF][vref] that gets checked.  In this case
    the "ref" argument will start with "VREF/", and the last two arguments
    won't be passed.

    'result' is similar to `ACCESS_1`, except that it is the *update hook*
    which dies as soon as access is rejected for the ref or any of the VREFs.
    Control then returns to git, and then to gitolite-shell, so the `POST_GIT`
    trigger *will* run.

  * `PRE_GIT` and `POST_GIT` run just before and after the git command.
    Extra arguments:
      * repo
      * user
      * 'R' or 'W'
      * 'any'
      * the git command ('git-receive-pack', 'git-upload-pack', or
        'git-upload-archive') being invoked.

    **NOTE** that the `POST_GIT` trigger has no way of knowing if the push
    succeeded, because 'git-shell' (or maybe 'git-receive-pack', I don't know)
    exits cleanly even if the update hook died.

  * `PRE_CREATE` and `POST_CREATE` run just before and after a new "[wild][]"
    repo is created by user action.  In addition, any command that creates a
    repo (like 'fork') or potentially changes permissions (like 'perms') may
    choose to run `POST_CREATE`.  Extra arguments:
      * repo
      * user
      * invoking operation
          * 'R' for fetch/clone/ls-remote, 'W' for push
          * can also be anything set by the external command running the
            trigger (e.g., see the perms and fork commands).  This lets the
            trigger code know how it was invoked.

    They are also run when a *normal* repo is created (say by adding a "repo
    foo" line to the conf file).  This case has only one extra argument:
      * repo

  * `POST_COMPILE` runs after an admin push has successfully "compiled" the
    config file.  By default, the next thing is to update the ssh authkeys
    file, then all the 'git-config's, gitweb access, and daemon access.

    No extra arguments.

## adding your own scripts to a trigger {#addtrig}

For gitolite v3.3 or less, adding your own scripts to a trigger list was
simply a matter of finding the trigger name in the rc file and adding an entry
to it.  Even for gitolite v3.4 or higher, if your rc file was created before
v3.4, *it will continue to work, and you can continue to add triggers to it
the same way as before*.

However, if you installed gitolite v3.4 or higher, you will see a different rc
file syntax.  This new rc file does not have trigger lists, but a simple list
of "features" within a list called "ENABLE" in the rc file; you simply comment
out or uncomment appropriate entries, and gitolite will *internally* create
the trigger lists correctly.

...which is fine for triggers that are shipped with gitolite, but now you're
wondering how to add your own.

The answer is: same as before.

Here's an example.  Let's say you wrote yourself a trigger script called
'foo', to be invoked from the `POST_CREATE` trigger list.  With the old
format, you'd find the following lines in the rc file:

    POST_CREATE                 =>
        [
            'post-compile/update-git-configs',
            'post-compile/update-gitweb-access-list',
            'post-compile/update-git-daemon-access-list',
        ],

and you'd simply add a line for 'foo' in that list.

With the new format, since there is no `POST_CREATE` trigger list defined in
the rc file, you'll need to add all this:

    POST_CREATE                 =>
        [
            'foo'
        ],

instead of just the 'foo' line.

Since the ENABLE list pulls in the rest of the trigger entries, this will be
*effectively* as if you had done this in a v3.3 rc file:

    POST_CREATE                 =>
        [
            'foo',
            'post-compile/update-git-configs',
            'post-compile/update-gitweb-access-list',
            'post-compile/update-git-daemon-access-list',
        ],

As you can see, the 'foo' gets added to the top of the list.

### displaying the resulting trigger list

You can use the 'gitolite query-rc' command to see what the trigger list
actually looks like.  For example:

    gitolite query-rc POST_CREATE

## tips

If you have code that latches onto more than one trigger, collecting data
(such as for logging), then the outputs may be intermixed.  You can record the
value of the environment variable `GL_TID` to tie together related entries.

