<!-- options: toc -->

% virtual refs

**IMPORTANT**: fallthru is success in VREFs, unlike the normal refs.  That
won't make sense until you read further, but I had to put it up here for folks
who stop reading halfway!

----

VREFs are a mechanism to add additional constraints to a push.

Here's an example to start you off.

To disallow junior developers from changing more than five files, or from
touching the Makefile, you can do this:

    repo foo
        RW+                     =   @all-devs

        -   VREF/COUNT/5        =   @junior-devs
        -   VREF/NAME/Makefile  =   @junior-devs

----

# basic use and understanding

Normally, rules deal with branches and tags (which git collectively calls
"refs").  The "ref" is a property of the push which gitolite checks against
the set of rules.

VREFs ("virtual refs") are other properties of a push that gitolite can be
told to check, in addition to the normal ref.  For example, "this push has
more than 5 changed files" could be one property.  Or "this push changed the
file called Makefile" could be another.  These properties are represented as
"virtual refs" that start with "VREF/".  (Recall that "normal" refs start with
"refs/").

The simplest way to use them is as *additional* "deny" rules to fail a push
that might otherwise have passed.  This is what the example at the top shows.

It helps to separate VREF rules from normal rules, since no access rule can
match both a normal ref and a VREF. Here's a good way to structure your rules:

*   Put your normal ref rules first.  These apply to the branch name or tag
    name that git itself knows about and sends to gitolite's update hook.

    Fallthru is failure here, which means the ref being pushed **must** match
    some rule in this set for the push to succeed.

*   Put your VREF rules next.  These apply to the virtual refs you want to
    use as additional checks for the push.

    Fallthru is success here, which means the (virtual) ref must be
    **explicitly denied** in order for the push to fail.

# advanced use

More complex uses are possible, but may be harder to understand.  You may want
to experiment with the rules to solidify your understanding as you read this.

## differences from normal refs

We know where normal refs (like "refs/heads/master" or "refs/tags/v1.0") come
from -- they are supplied by git itself when it calls the update hook.

VREFs have two differences with normal refs:

  * gitolite has to generate them somehow
  * fallthru is success, not failure

Here's some more detail on how it works.

  * first, the normal ("real") ref is checked.

    As you already know, the push dies if the ref hits a deny rule **or** it
    falls through without hitting an allow rule.

  * next, VREFs are generated and checked one by one.

    We'll talk about the generaton later, but for the check, a VREF dies (and
    kills the push) *only* if it meets an explicit deny rule ("-").  Fallthru
    does *not* cause failure of a VREF.

    [refex][] and [rules][] still apply, but several parts of the latter are
    just not relevant to VREFs (since VREFs only run from the update hook).
    Plus of course, as we said, fallthru is not a failure now.

## generating virtual refs

Gitolite uses the VREF rules themselves to help it generate the virtual refs.

Specifically, it looks at each rule that contains a VREF (there are 2 in the
above example) and calls a VREF-maker for each of them.

We'll take the COUNT example rule above.

When gitolite sees that rule, it calls the "COUNT" VREF-maker.  Specifically,
this is the `VREF/COUNT` program (See [here][cust] for actual locations on
disk).

Gitolite passes it the string "5" as an argument (actually, as the *eighth*
argument; details later).

The program (which can be written in any language) is expected to do one of
two things:

  * if the condition is satisfied (i.e., there *are* more than 5 files in this
    push), it should print `VREF/COUNT/5` to STDOUT.

  * otherwise it should print nothing.

It should exit with an exit code of zero in either case.

If it exits with a non-zero, the push dies regardless of what is printed (see
"mimicking a plain old update hook" for why this is useful).

# more details and nuances

## mimicking a plain old update hook

If the VREF maker exists with a non-zero exit code, then regardless of what it
prints or does not, the push dies.

This is just like a plain 'update' hook.  Since the first 3 arguments (see
later) are also the same that a plain 'update' hook receives, you can actually
use any existing update hook as a VREF-maker.

To repurpose an existing update hook as a VREF-maker, just copy it to the VREF
directory (again, see [here][cust] for actual locations on disk).  Then add
this rule to your repos:

    repo foo    # or maybe even 'repo @all'
        -   VREF/my-update-hook     =   @all

That's it.

## what if the VREF-maker prints a different VREF?

Unless you know what you're upto, don't do that.

But it's allowed and the behaviour is defined.  The VREF-maker for the NAME
VREF is a good example.  It ignores the arguments and just makes VREFs out of
the name of every file that was changed in the push.

Here's another example.  Consider the problem of not allowing pushes at
specific times.  Let's say repo 'foo' cannot be pushed between 4 and 7pm, and
repo 'bar' can only be pushed before 9am.  And of course all this only applies
to the junior developers, the poor guys!

    repo foo
        RW+                         =   @all

        -   VREF/Hour/16            =   @junior-devs
        -   VREF/Hour/17            =   @junior-devs
        -   VREF/Hour/18            =   @junior-devs

    repo bar
        RW+                         =   @all

        -   VREF/Hour/09            =   @junior-devs
        -   VREF/Hour/1[0-9]        =   @junior-devs
        -   VREF/Hour/2[0-9]        =   @junior-devs

In this example, we write the "Hour" VREF-maker to *ignore the argument
passed* and just print `VREF/Hour/NN` where NN can be between 00 to 23
inclusive and of course represents the current hour.

if foo is pushed at 6:30pm, the VREF-maker prints VREF/Hour/18, which
satisfies the third rule and is rejected.

If bar is pushed at, say, 7:20am, the vref printed is VREF/Hour/07, which does
not match any of the rules.  And fallthru is success so it passes.

## why is fallthru considered success with VREFs {#vref-fallthru}

Virtual refs are **best used** (1) as additional "deny" rules, performing
extra checks that core gitolite cannot.  You usually want such extra checks
only for some people.

When fallthru is success, you can simply *ignore* all the other users (for
whom such additional checks are not needed).

If fallthru were to be considered 'failure', you'd be forced to add a "success
rule" like this for *every* vref you used in this repo, in each case listing
every user who was not already mentioned in the context of that vref:

    RW+ VREF/VREFNAME   =   @userlist   # uggh! what a pain!

Worse, since every virtual ref involves calling an external program, many of
these calls may be wasted.

<font color="gray">(1) "best used as..." does not mean "only used as...".  For
example it's perfectly easy to turn this around if, instead of having a list
of people who *do* need extra checks, all you have is the complementary
list:

    RW+ VREF/NAME/Makefile      =   @senior-devs
    -   VREF/NAME/Makefile      =   @all

</font>

## what if the VREF-maker prints something that's not even a VREF?

The VREF-maker can print anything it wants to STDOUT.  Lines not starting with
`VREF/` are printed as is (so your VREF-maker can do mostly-normal printing to
STDOUT).  This is especially useful if you've turned an existing update hook
into a VREF-maker, and it prints stuff but you don't want to touch the code.

For lines starting with `VREF/`, the first word in each such line will be
treated as a virtual ref, while the rest, if any, is a message to be added to
the standard "...DENIED..." message that gitolite will print if that refex
matches and the rule is a deny rule.

## in what order are VREF-makers called?

VREF-makers are called in the sequence in which they appear in the conf file.

There are some optimisations to prevent calling the same VREF-maker with the
same arguments more than once, and the VREF-maker code for the NAME VREF
(which is special) is called only once regardless of how many times it appears
but these details should not concern anyone but a developer.

## what arguments are passed to the vref-maker? {#vref-args}

  * Arguments **1, 2, 3**: the 'ref', 'oldsha', and 'newsha' that git passed
    to the update hook (see 'man githooks').

    This, combined with the fact that non-zero exits are detected, mean that
    you can simply use an existing update.secondary as a VREF-maker as-is, no
    changes needed.

  * Arguments **4 and 5**: the 'oldtree' and 'newtree' SHAs.  These are the
    same as the oldsha and newsha values, except if one of them is all-0.
    (indicating a ref creation or deletion).  In that case the corresponding
    'tree' SHA is set (by gitolite, as a courtesy) to the special SHA
    `4b825dc642cb6eb9a060e54bf8d69288fbee4904`, which is the hash of an empty
    tree.

    (None of these shenanigans would have been needed if `git diff $oldsha
    $newsha` would not error out when passed an all-0 SHA.)

  * Argument **6**: the attempted access flag.  Typically `W` or `+`, but
    could also be `C`, `D`, or any of these 4 followed by `M`.  If you have to
    ask what they mean, you haven't read enough gitolite documentation to be
    able to make virtual refs work.

  * Argument **7**: is the entire refex; say `VREF/COUNT/3/NEWFILES`.

  * Arguments **8 onward**: are the split out (by `/`) portions of the refex,
    excluding the first two components.  In our example they would be `3`
    followed by `NEWFILES`.

Yes, argument 7 is redundant if you have 8 and 9.  It's meant to make it easy
to write vref-maker scripts in any language.  See script examples in source.

# VREF-makers shipped with gitolite

## restricting pushes by dir/file name {#NAME}

The "NAME" VREF allows you to restrict pushes by the names of dirs and files
changed.  (Side note: the NAME VREF is the only one directly implemented
within the update hook, so you won't find it in the VREF directory).

Here's an example.  Say you don't want junior developers pushing changes to
the Makefile, because it's quite complex:

    repo foo
            RW+                             =   @senior_devs
            RW                              =   @junior_devs

            -   VREF/NAME/Makefile          =   @junior_devs

When a senior dev pushes, the VREF is not invoked at all.  But when a junior
dev pushes, the VREF is invoked, and it returns a list of files changed **as
refs**, looking like this:

    VREF/NAME/file-1
    VREF/NAME/dir-2/file-3
    ...etc...

Each of these refs is matched against the access rules.  If one of them
happens to be the Makefile, then the ref returned (VREF/NAME/Makefile) will
match the deny rule and kill the push.

Another way to use this is when you know what is allowed instead of what is
not allowed.  Let's say the QA person is only allowed to touch a file called
CHANGELOG and any files in a directory called ReleaseNotes:

    repo foo
            RW+                             =   @senior_devs
            RW                              =   @junior_devs
            RW+                             =   QA-guy

            RW+ VREF/NAME/CHANGELOG         =   QA-guy
            RW+ VREF/NAME/ReleaseNotes/     =   QA-guy
            -   VREF/NAME/                  =   QA-guy

## number of changed or new files {#COUNT}

The COUNT VREF is used like this:

    -   VREF/COUNT/9                    =   @junior-developers

In response, if anyone in the user list pushes a commit series that
changes more than 9 files, a vref of "VREF/COUNT/9" is returned.  Gitolite
uses that as a "ref" to match against all the rules, hits the same rule
that invoked it, and denies the request.

If the user did not push more than 9 files, the VREF code returns nothing,
and nothing happens.

COUNT can take one more argument:

    -   VREF/COUNT/9/NEWFILES           =   @junior-developers

This is the same as before, but have to be more than 9 *new* files not
just changed files.

## advanced filetype detection

Note: this is more for illustration than use; it's rather specific to one of
the projects I manage but the idea is the important thing.

Sometimes a file has a standard extension (that cannot be 'gitignore'd), but
it is actually automatically generated.  Here's one way to catch it:

     -   VREF/FILETYPE/AUTOGENERATED     =   @all

You can look at `src/VREF/FILETYPE` to see how it handles the
'AUTOGENERATED' option.  You could also have a more generic option, like
perhaps BINARY, and handle that in the FILETYPE vref too.

## checking author email

Some people want to ensure that "you can only push your own commits".

If you force it on everyone, this is a very silly idea (see "Philosophical
Notes" section of `src/VREF/EMAIL-CHECK`).

But there may be value in enforcing it just for the junior developers.

The neat thing is that the existing `contrib/update.email-check` was just
copied to `src/VREF/EMAIL-CHECK` and it works, because VREFs get
the same first 3 arguments and those are all that it cares about.  (Note: you
have to change one subroutine in that script if you want to use it)

## voting on commits {#votes}

Although gitolite can't/won't do the whole "code review + workflow
enforcement" thing that Gerrit Code Review does, a basic implementation of
voting on a commit is surprisingly easy.  See src/VREF/VOTES for details (and
note that the actual *code* is just 2-3 lines; the rest is inline
documentation).

# other ideas -- code welcome!

## "no non-merge first-parents"

Shruggar on #gitolite wanted this.  Possible code to implement it would be
something like this (untested)

    [ -z "$(git rev-list --first-parent --no-merges $2..$3)" ]

This can be implemented using `src/VREF/MERGE-CHECK` as a model.  That script
does what the 'M' qualifier does in access rules (see last part of
[this][write-types]), although the syntax to be used in conf/gitolite will be
quite different.

## other ideas for VREFs

Here are some more ideas:

  * Number of commits (`git rev-list --count $old $new`).
  * Number of binary files in commit (currently I only know to count
    occurrences of ` Bin ` in the output of `git diff --stat`.
  * Number of *new* binary files (count ` Bin 0 ->` in `git diff --stat`
    output).
  * Time of day/day of week (see example snippet somewhere above).
  * IP address.
  * Phase of the moon.

Note that pretty much anything that involves `$oldsha..$newsha` will have to
deal with the issue that when you push a new tag or branch, the "old" part
is all 0's, and unless you consider `--all` existing branches and tags it
becomes meaningless in terms of "number of new files" etc.
