# building the documentation

----

I changed from my homemade system to mkdocs, mainly due to the search
facility.  (I'm sure there are any number of other static site generators out
there, but this one seemed to have the smallest footprint and was easiest to
install and get going).

# building the docs

*   Make sure the tree is not dirty.
*   Run `bin/build`; take a few seconds and grabs the screen; just deal!
*   Deploy `site/`
*   Run `git checkout -f` to clean out the in-place changes done by the
    syntax highlighting -- you **don't** want to check them in!

# what doesn't work in mkdocs

## bad language guesses

It seems to be too hard to make it turn off its "guess the language"
pseudo-smartness when you use a plain indented code block.  And looking at the
mailing list archives does not give me much hope this will be fixed.  So
you're left with strange colors on some random words in many code blocks!

(I could fence each of them with an explicit language but I'm reluctant to do
that; plain markdown's plain indented code **should** be left plain, ideally!)

## no hidden docs

Every document must appear in the document menu (top nav bar), even if it is
several levels deep.  The only way to have a document rendered without putting
it on the nav bar is not to even list a page hierarchy, which makes them all
come out in alphabetical order, which is useless for a project of this size.

Ironically, this doc will never be rendered -- you'll only see it in the
source repo.

## `foo bar` split across lines

If a `foo bar` is split across lines due to vim formatting, the bloody output
also shows it split there.  My constant OCD to reformat all paras has taken a
hit, due to all these manually UN-formatted paragraphs.

## TOC levels

The 'cinder' theme gives you 3 levels, but does not scroll the side nav at
all (i.e., if you have too many entries, you just won't see the ones that were
below the window bottom)!  Sticking with default theme for now.

## code highlight

1.  the "codehilite" extension seems too complicated looking at the steps
    described in
    <https://pythonhosted.org/Markdown/extensions/code_hilite.html>

2.  in any case they don't recognise gitolite syntax.

So we just use the

    ```LANG
    ...code...
    ```

syntax and let our preprocessor fix things up using vim.  Kludgy, slow,
annoying (all those xterms -- I need to implement caching for this), but it
gets the job done with a minimum of fuss.

## short anchors

can only be created like:

    <h1 id="dl">download</h1>

Using

    # <a id="dl" />download

causes some weird artefacts in the generated page.

At present I'm not using them at all; just using the long forms.

<!--

# notes

from <https://pythonhosted.org/Markdown/extensions/admonition.html>

    rST suggests the following types, but you’re free to use whatever you
    want: attention, caution, danger, error, hint, important, note, tip,
    warning.


# vim: set ft=markdown:
-->
