# gitolite cookbook

<center>(a.k.a. "stop all that rambling and just tell me what I need to do!")</center>

----

Documentation is meant to be as complete as possible, which means it attempts
to cover all situations and scenarios.  That makes it harder to read.

However, if you make some assumptions, remove the rationale, justification,
exceptions and special cases, etc., and generally just say *what* is to be
done rather than explain *why*, many tasks can be described very easily.

Or, if the main documentation already does that, a cookbook may help you find
it faster, simply because it's organised differently.

Maybe this will help.  If you run into problems, please check the main
documentation before asking for help.

# administration

## separating "key admin" from "repo admin"

In gitolite, the person who controls the keys is the most critical in terms of
security -- because he can always add his own key in your name :-)

Traditionally, the same person also administers repos and permissions.  But
sometimes you want to separate them.

To separate those roles, put the following in conf/gitolite.conf, and let the
repo-manager manage everything through "actual.conf":

```gitolite
repo gitolite-admin
    RW+ = key-manager repo-manager

    RW+ VREF/NAME/                    = key-manager
    -   VREF/NAME/keydir/             = @all
    -   VREF/NAME/conf/gitolite.conf  = @all

include "actual.conf"
```

# access

## looking up repo access from external tools

There are two supported interfaces for this, one in perl and one in shell.
Other languages should probably use the shell mode.  (The shell mode has a
very convenient "batch" mode if you need to check many repos at once).

**Perl interface**: A good intro to this, including a link to code, using
gitweb as an example can be found by looking for 'repo-specific authorisation
in gitweb' in the page on [allowing access to gitweb and
git-daemon](gitweb-daemon). Some notes:

  * be sure to read the comments in the code to learn exactly how to adapt it
    to your needs
  * in place of the `can_read` function in that code, you can of course use
    `can_write`.  In fact, reading the comments in "Easy.pm" (look for it in
    the source) shows you several other interesting tests you can make, like
    `is_admin`, `in_group`, and `owns`.

**Shell interface**: If you want to do this from shell, it's even easier. The
same "Easy.pm" source contains comments that show shell equivalents for each
of the functions it exports, but here's a sample:

    if gitolite access -q reponame username W
    then
        ...

You can even test for access to specific branches:

    if gitolite access -q reponame username W master
    then
        ...

<span class="gray">If your gitolite is older than v3.6, you must use the full ref name;
just 'master' won't do.</span>

## allowing access by other programs

Giving external tools (like apache) access to gitolite repositories involves
making sure that the unix owner/group and permissions settings allow this.
This is all described in the UMASK section in the page on the [rc file](rc),
because that's the only setting that gitolite controls; every thing else is
pure Unix.

# commands

## adding your own commands

To add a command, say `foo`, do this:

1.  add this line in the rc file, within the `%RC` block, if it's not already
    present, or uncomment it if it's already present and commented out:

        LOCAL_CODE => "$ENV{HOME}/local",

2.  copy the program `foo` into `$HOME/local/commands`.  (Don't forget the
    `chmod +x`!)

## making commands available to remote users

Once you do the above, `foo` is available as `gitolite foo`.  To make it
available to remote users (as `ssh git@host foo`), add the line:

    `foo`,

(including the comma at the end) to the ENABLE list in the rc file.

# hooks

Note: the main documentation for this feature starts [here][hooks].

[hooks]: non-core/#hooks-and-gitolite

## adding your own update hooks

You have some update hooks (for example crlf checking) that you want to
include in gitolite.  Assuming the hook itself is tested and works as a normal
**git** update hook does (i.e., conforms to what `man githooks` says an update
hook should do), here's how to do this:

1.  add this line in the rc file, within the `%RC` block, if it's not already
    present, or uncomment it if it's already present and commented out:

        LOCAL_CODE => "$ENV{HOME}/local",

2.  copy your update hook to a subdirectory called VREF under this directory,
    giving it a suitable name (let's say "crlf"):

        # log on to gitolite hosting user on the server, then:
        cd $HOME
        mkdir -p local/VREF
        cp your-crlf-update-hook local/VREF/crlf
        chmod +x local/VREF/crlf

3.  in your gitolite-admin clone, edit conf/gitolite.conf and
    add lines like this:

            -   VREF/crlf       =   @all

    to each repo that should have that "update" hook.

    Alternatively, you can simply add this at the end of the
    gitolite.conf file:

    ```gitolite
    repo @all
        -   VREF/crlf       =   @all
    ```

    Either way, add/commit/push the change to the gitolite-admin repo.

## adding other (non-update) hooks

Say you want other hooks, like a post-receive hook.  Here's how:

1.  add this line in the rc file, within the `%RC` block, if it's not already
    present, or uncomment it if it's already present and commented out:

        LOCAL_CODE => "$ENV{HOME}/local",

2.  put your hooks into that directory, in a sub-sub-directory called
    "hooks/common":

        # log on to gitolite hosting user on the server, then:
        cd $HOME
        mkdir -p local/hooks/common
        cp your-post-receive-hook local/hooks/common/post-receive
        chmod +x local/hooks/common/post-receive

3.  run `gitolite setup` to have the hooks propagate to existing repos (repos
    created after this will get them anyway).

## variation: maintain these hooks in the gitolite-admin repo

!!! danger "Important security note:"

    **If you enable this, anyone who can push changes to the admin repo will
    effectively be able to run any arbitrary command on the server.**  See
    [gitolite admin and shell access][privesc] for more background.

[privesc]: rc/#security-note-gitolite-admin-and-shell-access

If you want to maintain these update hooks (VREFs) or non-update hooks
(post-update, pre-receive, post-receive) in the gitolite-admin repo, instead
of having to log on to the server and make changes, the procedure is almost
the same except for the following differences:

1.  add this line in the rc file, within the `%RC` block, if it's not already
    present, or uncomment it if it's already present and commented out:

        LOCAL_CODE => "$rc{GL_ADMIN_BASE}/local",

    Notice "local" is *not* in `$HOME` like in the previous examples!

2.  the hooks/scripts are to be added inside your gitolite-admin clone, not on
    the server.  That is, whereever the above two sections say `cd $HOME`,
    you should read it as "cd /path/to/your/gitolite-admin-clone".

    (The directory `local` will be within this clone of course, not in
    `$HOME`.)

3.  add/commit/push as usual.

For update hooks, you will of course need to add VREF rule lines to
appropriate repos in the conf file.  For non-update hooks, you **don't** need
to run 'gitolite setup' on the server; the push takes care of that.

## <span class="gray">(v3.6+)</span> variation: repo-specific hooks

Until now, the non-update hooks you specified apply to all repos.  Here's how
to apply them only to certain repos:

1.  add this line in the rc file, within the `%RC` block, if it's not already
    present, or uncomment it if it's already present and commented out:

        LOCAL_CODE => "$rc{GL_ADMIN_BASE}/local",

2.  uncomment the 'repo-specific-hooks' line in the rc file or add it to the
    ENABLE list if it doesn't exist.

    If your rc file does not have an ENABLE list, you need to add this to the
    POST_COMPILE and the POST_CREATE lists.  Click [here][addtrig] for more on
    all this.

3.  put your hooks into your gitolite-admin clone, as follows:

        # on your workstation
        cd /path/to/your/gitolite-admin-clone
        mkdir -p local/hooks/repo-specific

    Now add your hooks to that directory, but instead of using the git
    "standard" names (pre-receive, post-receive, post-update), you use
    descriptive names (e.g. "deploy", "RSS-post", etc).

    **For pre-receive or pre-auto-gc you should not use more than one hook.
    If you really need more than one, ask on the mailing list.**


4.  add them to the repos you want them to be active in, in your conf file.
    For example:

        repo foo
            option hook.post-update     =   jenkins
        repo bar @baz
            option hook.post-update     =   deploy RSS-post

5.  add, commit, and push the admin repo.

[addtrig]: triggers/#adding-your-own-scripts-to-a-trigger

# triggers

## adding your own triggers

First, write your trigger code, using the documentation [here](triggers).
Note especially the sections "common arguments" and "trigger-specific
arguments".  Look in the shipped triggers for ideas.

Let's say your trigger is called `foo`, and it will be a `PRE_GIT` trigger.

1.  add this line in the rc file, within the `%RC` block, if it's not already
    present, or uncomment it if it's already present and commented out:

        LOCAL_CODE => "$ENV{HOME}/local",

2.  copy the program `foo` into `$HOME/local/triggers`.  (Don't forget the
    `chmod +x`!)

3.  edit `~/.gitolite.rc` again, and look for a `PRE_GIT` section.  If it
    exists, add `'foo',` (note the trailing comma!) to it.  If it does not
    exist, add this block just before the `ENABLE` section:

        PRE_GIT =>
        [
            'foo'
        ],

    (again, note the trailing comma at the end of the block!)

    After saving the file, test that this worked by running `gitolite query-rc PRE_GIT`;
    your `foo` should be in the output list.  If it's not, back up
    and double check your work.

That should be it.

# VREFs

## adding your own VREFs

Adding VREFs is the same as adding the update hook, so please see the section
on "adding your own update hooks" above.

## example VREFs

However, *writing* a proper VREF is not the same as writing a normal git
"update hook".  A proper VREF does more than just take 3 arguments, do
something, and exit with a non-zero exit code for failure.

A VREF is called with at least 4 more arguments after the 3 that git itself
defines for an update hook, plus usually at least one or two more.  It also
returns a lot more meaningful results via STDOUT.

Here are some examples.  I also advise you to keep a browser tab open to the
doc on [VREF arguments][vref-args] as you look at these.

!!! danger "Important:"

    **VREFs only come into play for push operations.  When we say "access" in
    this section, we mean only write access.**  If you want to restrict it
    even for reads, you can do this in a `PRE_GIT` trigger; there's an example
    in `contrib/triggers/IP-check` in the gitolite source tree that may be
    useful as a template.

[vref-args]: vref/#what-arguments-are-passed-to-the-vref-maker

### example 1: restricting by day of week

Here's the conf extract to say "junior devs can only push on weekdays":

```gitolite
repo foo
    -   VREF/DAY/Sat    =   @junior-devs
    -   VREF/DAY/Sun    =   @junior-devs
```

The code for this VREF is ridiculously simple:

```sh
#!/bin/bash
echo VREF/DAY/`date +%a`
```

On encountering the VREF rules (i.e., when a junior dev tries to push to this
repo), gitolite calls the "DAY" VREF-maker.  The code within the VREF maker
simply echoes something like "VREF/DAY/Mon", where the last part is whatever
the actual day of the week happens to be.

This output is then treated as a virtual ref and matched against the rules.
On a Monday to Friday, nothing happens, because the VREFs generated do not
match any deny rules (or indeed any rules at all).  On weekends, they do
match, and the push is denied.

### example 2: restricting by source IP address

This one restricts junior developers to push to this repo only from a specific
network block.  The conf file here is slightly different.  We know that the
VREF-maker will return with *some* network address (as you'll see in the code
later), so we set it up so that the correct network block is allowed and
anything else is disallowed:

```gitolite
repo foo
    RW+ VREF/FROM/192.168.48.0/23   =   @junior-devs
    -   VREF/FROM                   =   @junior-devs
```

The code is not that complex.  We take the user's actual IP address (this is
available as the first word in `$SSH_CONNECTION` for ssh users, and for
smart-http users, gitolite fakes it and creates that variable!).  We then
treat the "23" in the VREF rule, which appears to the code as `$9`, as the
number of bits in the network address, then compute the network address for
the users IP with that number of bits.

This network address is then sent back.  (The `$9` is added back at the end,
but this is only to enable it to match the VREF rule).

```sh
#!/bin/bash

# exit if no arguments were supplied to the VREF.  This covers the
# second VREF rule in the conf above
[ -n "$8" ] || exit 0

from=${SSH_CONNECTION%% *}

eval `ipcalc -n $from/$9`       # sets env var "NETWORK"

echo VREF/FROM/$NETWORK/$9
```

For a source IP of 192.168.49.97, this runs `ipcalc -n 192.168.49.97/23`,
which gives the network address 192.168.48.0.  The echo then just sends back
VREF/FROM/192.168.48.0/23.  This VREF matches the RW+ line.

But if the IP is, say, 192.168.45.67, running `ipcalc -n 192.168.45.67/23`
gives you 192.168.44.0.  The echo then send back VREF/FROM/192.18.44.0/23,
which won't match the RW+ line, but will match the next one and thus deny
the push.

(One thing that may not be obvious in this specific example is that you have
to be careful when constructing the VREF rule.  For any VREF/FROM/A/B, the
result of running `ipcalc -n A/B` must be A, otherwise this won't work.  That
is, the bits of the network address after the network bits must be zero).

# wild repos

## making exceptions for *specific* instances of a wild repo

Sometimes you want to specify rules or config for specific instances of a wild
repo, while still leaving it to be created by a user in the normal way.

This **will not** work:

```gitolite
repo foo/..*
    C                   =   blah blah
    RW+                 =   CREATOR
    RW                  =   WRITERS
    R                   =   READERS

# this does NOT work
repo foo/special-1
    RW+                 =   sitaram
    option  foo.bar     =   baz
```

The repo will be created as a **normal** (not wild) repo as soon as you push,
which means you can't run the [perms][] command on it to add people to the
READERS and WRITERS [roles][], or do other things that wild repos allow.

[perms]: user/#setget-additional-permissions-for-repos-you-created
[roles]: wild/#roles

The mental nudge you need to deal with this is to think what you would do if
you had to write the same rule for more than one repo, say, any repo starting
with "foo/special-" followed by a number.  You'd use a pattern.  And a pattern
prevents an ordinary repo from being created.

So do this:

```gitolite
# this will work
repo foo/special-[1]
    RW+                 =   sitaram
    option  foo.bar     =   baz
```

Using a pattern for just one repo might sound like a kludge, but it's
perfectly valid and supported.

Note that you do NOT need a "C" rule in there, since the pattern is a subset
of the previous one (`foo/..*`), everything there applies to this repo also.
If you're not sure why that is, you may need to read up on [rule
accumulation][accum].

[accum]: conf/#rule-accumulation

# moving stuff around

## moving a gitolite install from one machine to another

[moving]: install/#moving-servers

See [moving servers][moving].

