# fool-proof, step-by-step, install and setup

----

This page is useful if the normal [[install]] instructions did not work for
you.

# pre-requisites, etc

These are the pre-requisites:

  * Any Linux machine on which git has already been installed.
  * Probably any BSD or legacy system like Solaris will also work, but I have
    not tested them.
      * I do not consider Apple devices to be Unix enough; it should work, but
        please do not ask me for help if it does not.

This page has several restrictions and constraints that seem unnecessary to
people who **do** understand ssh. That's the whole point -- I'm compensating
for lack of ssh knowledge by removing things that trip people up.

If even this page does not help you install gitolite, I probably cannot help
you.  Either you did not follow the instructions carefully <font
color="gray">(maybe some task has to be run on your workstation, but you ran
it on the server, or you ran something as root when it should be as the
hosting user, etc.)</font>, or your environment is far too different from
standard Unix, or you have some other problem.  In any case, it is not
something I can help with.  Sorry.

# assumptions

  * Your name is Ron.  Substitute accordingly in the instructions below.

  * You have a workstation.

  * You have a server called `server`.

  * You have root access on this server.

# installation tasks

1.  Create a new userid on the server, say `git`.  This will be the **hosting
    user**.  ("hosting user" means when you're done installing, your users
    will use URLs like `git@server:reponame` or `ssh://git@server/reponame`).

    **Make sure this is a NEW userid**.

    If the name you want already exists, then:

      * Log in as root.
      * If you have any data on that user's HOME directory save it somewhere
        else.
      * Delete the userid.
      * Completely wipe out (erase) the home directory of the user (since on
        most systems merely deleting the user does not remove the home
        directory).
      * Re-create the userid again.

2.  If you don't already have one, make yourself an ssh keypair **on your
    workstation**.

    Do NOT add this public key to the authorised keys file on the newly
    created hosting user!

    Your ONLY access to the new (`git`) userid should be by logging onto the
    server as root, then running `su - git`.

3.  Now copy the pubkey from your workstation (`~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub`) to the
    server as `/tmp/ron.pub`.  (Your name is Ron, remember?)

4.  Log on to the server as root.

5.  Switch to the `git` user:

        su - git

6.  Clone the gitolite source code

        git clone https://github.com/sitaramc/gitolite

7.  Install it

        cd $HOME
        mkdir -p bin
        gitolite/install -to $HOME/bin

8.  Set it up

        cd $HOME
        $HOME/bin/gitolite setup -pk /tmp/ron.pub

9.  Now go to your workstation and type in

        git ls-remote git@server:gitolite-admin

    This should return something like

        9dd8aab60bac5e54ccf887a87b4f3d35c96b05e4    HEAD
        9dd8aab60bac5e54ccf887a87b4f3d35c96b05e4    refs/heads/master

    (do I have to mention that your SHAs will be different?)

# administration tasks

Most day-to-day administration is done by making changes to a clone of the
gitolite-admin repo and pushing.  (There are some things that are done by
editing `$HOME/.gitolite.rc` on the server, but those are too advanced for
this tutorial so we will ignore that).

1.  To start administering gitolite, clone the gitolite-admin repo:

        git clone git@server:gitolite-admin

2.  Now go to the new directory this creates, and look around:

        cd gitolite-admin
        ls -A

    which gives you

        conf/  .git/  keydir/

    Ignoring the ".git" and exploring further:

        ls -A conf keydir

    which says:

        conf:
        gitolite.conf

        keydir:
        ron.pub

3.  Let's say you want to add your colleague Alice.  She has sent you her ssh
    public key by email (the file is called `id_rsa.pub`).  Save this file as
    /tmp/alice.pub, then do this:

        # still in your gitolite-admin clone, from the previous step
        cp /tmp/alice.pub keydir
        git add keydir
        git commit -m 'new user alice'
        git push

4.  Well, that might not be sufficient.  There aren't any new repos for alice
    to play with, yet.  So here's what you do: edit "conf/gitolite.conf" and
    add something like to the end:

        repo foo
            RW+     =   alice
            R       =   ron

    Save the file, then `git add conf; git commit -m 'new repo foo'; git
    push`.

    This will automatically create a brand new repo called "foo" on the server, and
    alice will be able to clone from it, or push anything to it.

