# allowing access to gitweb and git-daemon

----

!!! danger ""

    Gitolite does **not** install or configure gitweb/git-daemon -- that is a
    one-time setup you must do separately.

# gitweb

The following repos are deemed to be readable by gitweb:

  * Any repos readable by the special user `gitweb`.
  * Any repos containing one or more of the following types of lines:
    (actually, any config variable starting with `gitweb`).

        config gitweb.owner         =   owner name
        config gitweb.description   =   some description
        config gitweb.category      =   some category

    Side note: the following shorter forms are available as [syntactic
    sugar](non-core#syntactic-sugar) for the above longer forms:

        owner       =   owner name
        desc        =   some description
        category    =   some category

The list of gitweb-readable repos is written to a file whose name is given by
the [[rc]] file variable `GITWEB_PROJECTS_LIST`.  The default value of this
variable, if it is not specified or empty, is `$HOME/projects.list`.

In addition, each of the config variables described above is written to the
repo to which it pertains, so that gitweb can use them.

## changing the UMASK

Gitweb (or cgit, redmine, etc.) typically runs under a different userid, and
the default permissions that gitolite sets make them unreadable.

See the section on the `UMASK` variable in the page for the [rc file](rc).

## repo-specific authorisation in gitweb

Gitweb has a feature whereby it will call a (perl) function that you supply,
passing it the full path to the repo being accessed.  If the remote user is
authenticated, the username will be available, so your function can take those
two pieces of information and return true or false to allow or deny the
repository access.

If you want to use gitolite's access rules in making this determination, you
will first have to ensure that the HTTP username (i.e., the username known to
apache/gitweb) is the same as the gitolite username.  If you're using
gitolite's [[http]] mode, this is probably already true, but if you're using
the more widely used ssh mode, you'll have to make sure they match.

You then need to add [this code][gwch] to your gitweb.conf.

[gwch]: gitweb.conf.html

# git-daemon

Any repo readable by the special user `daemon` is deemed to be readable by
git-daemon.  For each of these repos, an empty file called
`git-daemon-export-ok` is created in the repository (i.e., the `repo.git`
directory inside `$HOME/repositories`).

# tips

Setting descriptions en-masse usually does not make sense, but you can
certainly do things like

    repo @all
        R       =   gitweb daemon

assuming you have other means of setting 'gitweb.description' and
'gitweb.owner'.

Also see [this][deny-rules] for a twist on that.

[deny-rules]: conf-2/#read-access-respecting-deny-rules

