# installing on a smart http git server

----

!!! note "Note:"
    "smart http" refers to the feature that came with git 1.6.6, late 2009 or
    so.  The base documentation for this is `man git-http-backend`.  Do
    **NOT** read `Documentation/howto/setup-git-server-over-http.txt` and
    think that is the same or even relevant -- that is from 2006 and is quite
    different (and arguably obsolete).

# WARNINGS and important notes

  * Please read [authentication versus authorisation][auth] first, and make
    sure you understand what is gitolite's responsibility and what isn't.

  * I have tested this only on stock Fedora (whatever is the current version);
    YDMV.

[auth]: concepts#authentication-and-authorisation

# assumptions:

  * Apache 2.x and git installed.
  * Httpd runs under the "apache" userid; adjust instructions below if not.
  * Similarly for "/var/www" and other file names/locations.

# instructions

In place of detailed instructions, there is a script called
`t/smart-http.root-setup`.  **Do NOT run this script as is -- it is actually
meant for my testing setup and deletes stuff**.  However, it does provide an
excellent (and working!) narration of what you need to do to install gitolite
in smart http mode.

Make a copy of the script, go through it carefully, (possibly removing lines
that delete files etc.), change values per your system, and only then run it.

!!! note "Note:"

    The `GIT_PROJECT_ROOT` variable (see "man git-http-backend") is no longer
    optional.  Make sure you set it to some place outside apache's
    `DOCUMENT_ROOT`.</span>

# allowing unauthenticated access

If you want users to see repos without performing any HTTP authentication, you
should first decide what repos they should have unauthenticated access to:

    repo foo bar baz        # or maybe '@all'?
        R   =   nobody

Then in the rc file (`~/.gitolite.rc`), in the section marked "rc variables
used by various features", add this (including the trailing comma):

    HTTP_ANON_USER      =>  'nobody',

# Making repositories available to both ssh and http mode clients

This section has been contributed by Thomas Hager (duke at sigsegv dot at),
and is available [here](contrib/ssh-and-http).

# usage

## client side

Git URLs look like `https://user:password@server/git/reponame.git`.

The custom commands, like "info", "expand" should be handled as follows.  The
command name will come just after the `/git/`, followed by a `?`, followed by
the arguments, with `+` representing a space.  Here are some examples:

```sh
# ssh git@server info
curl https://user:password@server/git/info
# ssh git@server info repopatt
curl https://user:password@server/git/info?repopatt
# ssh git@server info repopatt user1 user2
curl https://user:password@server/git/info?repopatt+user1+user2
```

With a few nice shell aliases, you won't even notice the horrible convolutions
here ;-)  See t/smart-http for a couple of useful ones.

## server side

The `gitolite` command (for example, `gitolite compile`, `gitolite query-rc`,
and so on) *can* be run on the server, but it's not straightforward.  Assuming
you installed exactly as given in this page, you should

  * get a shell by using, say, `su -s /bin/bash - apache`
  * run `export HOME=$HOME/gitolite-home`
  * run `export PATH=$PATH:$HOME/bin`

and *then* you can run `gitolite <subcommand>`

