# Hosting Git Repositories

----

Gitolite allows you to setup git hosting on a central server, with
fine-grained access control and many more powerful features.

# install/setup

<span class="box-r">If you're installing via your package manager, make sure
you get the right one; it's often called `gitolite3`.</span>

Source code is at <https://github.com/sitaramc/gitolite>.

If your Unix-fu and ssh-fu are good, take a look at the [[quick install]]
page.  Otherwise follow the documentation flow, skipping whatever you think
you don't need.

# documentation

<span class="green box-r" style="padding: 10px"> **(April 2014): There's a
[book on gitolite][book] out**.  I've received some emails over the years
asking where to donate for gitolite to show your appreciation, and I've always
refused politely.  Well, if you insist... buy the book :-) </span>

In general, the sections (see links in the navigation bar at the top) should
be fairly self-explanatory, and reading through the documentation as it flows
(i.e., using the "Next" link at the top right of each page) should work fine.
There are some forward references here and there, but you can ignore those
links on a first pass.

!!! danger "In addition:"

    There's a **[[fool proof setup]]** guide with detailed help showing one
    fool-proof way to install, as long as you follow instructions faithfully!

    Once you've installed and setup, there's the **[[cookbook]]** with recipes
    for common tasks.

# TROUBLESHOOTING

The [emergencies](emergencies) page helps with all sorts of install/setup issues,
recovering from lost keys and other self-inflicted wounds, lists some common
(and some uncommon!) errors and non-standard configs that may trip you up.

# contact/support

## security issues

<span class="red">If you think you found a possible **security issue**, please email me
(<sitaramc@gmail.com>) directly.</span>

## mailing list(s)

For all other communications, please use the mailing list.  **NOTE**: The
first email from a new member is held until I can clear it; subsequent emails
from the same email address do not get held up.

Mailing list for support and general discussion:

*   Subscribe: <gitolite+subscribe@googlegroups.com>
*   Post: <gitolite@googlegroups.com>

There's also a low traffic, one-way, mailing list for release and security
announcements:

*   Subscribe: <gitolite-announce+subscribe@googlegroups.com>

If you wish to send me code, please see the file called CONTRIBUTING in the
source distribution.

## IRC

Our IRC channel is `#gitolite` on freenode.  I live in India (UTC+0530 time
zone), but there are a few regulars (*thanks, guys, you know who you are!*)
from other times zones.  That said, it's not heavy traffic and you may have to
wait a while for an answer, depending on the time of day and day of week.

There are also many gitolite-knowledgeable people on the git channel `#git`.

# license

The gitolite software is copyright Sitaram Chamarty and is licensed under the
GPL v2; please see the file called COPYING in the source distribution.

This **documentation**, which is maintained separately from the main gitolite
source code, is copyright Sitaram Chamarty and is provided under a [Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported
License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).

However, certain parts are contributed by others who may have chosen other
licenses; their names and license will be mentioned in the respective files.

Documentation for a software product will naturally contain code examples.  I
believe that the principle of fair use should cover use of those snippets; see
especially factors 3 and 4 in the list of factors
[here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fair_use#Fair_use_under_United_States_law).

If you're not convinced that it would be fair use, then you may consider those
code snippets, as well as associated "comments" if any, to be under the GPLv2
license.  Licensing is about intent, and the intent of these examples is that
you use them wherever and however you can use gitolite itself.

!!! note "Note:"

    GIT is a trademark of Software Freedom Conservancy and my use of
    "Gitolite" is under license.

[basic]: basic.html
[advanced]: advanced.html
[book]: https://www.packtpub.com/gitolite-essentials/book

