# non-core features shipped with gitolite

----

**Important Notes on "non-core" features**:

1.  The ["non-core" gitolite](non-core) page is the starting point for all
    information about ... non-core gitolite :)

2.  This page decribes many of the non-core features that come with gitolite.
    If a non-core feature is shipped with gitolite, but information about it
    is not found in this page, it can be found within the source code; please
    look there.

    [Commands](non-core/#gitolite-commands), however, have some extra magic,
    which is not available to the other types of non-core programs:

      * Running the command with a single `-h` option (i.e., `gitolite <command> -h`
        or `ssh git@host <command> -h`), will display a suitable
        message.  Please report a bug to me if one of them doesn't.

      * Running 'help', (either as `gitolite help` on the server, or
        `ssh git@host help` remotely), will give you a list of commands you are
        allowed to run.

3.  Non-core code is **meant** to be [localised for your site][localcode] if
    you don't like what the shipped version does.  You can even maintain it
    [within your gitolite-admin repo][pushcode] if you wish.

[localcode]: non-core/#for-your-non-core-programs
[pushcode]: non-core/#using-the-gitolite-admin-repo-to-manage-non-core-code

# commands

This is a list of commands that are available in gitolite, with brief
descriptions and, if available, a link to more detailed information.  Note
that in most cases running it with `-h` will give you enough to work with.

Also note that not all of these commands are available remotely.

(The more common/important commands are in bold).

  * *access* -- print or test access rights for repo/user
  * *config* <span class="gray">(v3.6.3+)</span> -- allow limited remote use of 'git config'
  * *create* -- create a wild repo
  * *creator* -- print or test creator name for wild repo
  * *D* -- lets you *D*elete wild repos created using the *C* permission :)
  * **desc** -- show/set description for wild repo
  * *fork* -- fork a repo on the server.  This uses the `-l` option to git
    clone, so it runs really fast
  * *git-config* -- print (or text existence of) 'config' values in the repo.
    (Don't forget that `option foo.bar = 1` is merely syntactic sugar for
    `config gitolite-options.foo.bar = 1`, so this can be used to query
    gitolite options also
  * **help** -- see note 1 at the top of this page
  * *htpasswd* -- sets your htpasswd
  * **[info][]** -- print git/gitolite version, list repos you have access to
  * *[lock](locking)* -- lock binary files for exclusive use (in combination
    with the 'lock' VREF)
  * *[mirror][sync]* -- manually mirror a repo to a slave
  * *motd* <span class="gray">(v3.6.1+)</span> -- set/remove a message of the day, per repo or for the whole
    system
  * *option* <span class="gray">(v3.6.3+)</span> -- allow repo owner to set options for a repo
  * **[perms][]** -- list or set permissions for wild repo
  * *[push][bypass]* -- push a gitolite repo locally, bypassing gitolite
  * *readme* <span class="gray">(v3.6.1+)</span> -- show, remove or set the README.html file for repo.
  * *rsync* -- resumable downloads of git bundles (bundles are auto-created as
    needed)
  * *sshkeys-lint* -- look for potential problems in ssh keys
  * *[sskm](contrib/sskm)* -- self-service key management
  * *sudo* -- allows an admin (i.e., someone who has push rights to the
    'gitolite-admin' repo) to run any remote command as some other user.  This
    is useful, for example, when a user claims he is unable to access a repo,
    and you need to check the 'info' output for him, etc.  However, it does
    not work the other way, sorry!
  * *symbolic-ref* -- run `git symbolic-ref` on a repo, remotely
  * *who-pushed* -- determine who pushed a given commit
  * *writable* -- disable/enable writes to specific repo (or all repos, if
    you're an admin)

[info]: user/#the-info-command
[sync]: mirroring/#manually-synchronising-a-slave-repo
[perms]: user/#setget-additional-permissions-for-repos-you-created
[bypass]: emergencies/#bypassing-gitolite

# syntactic sugar

The following "sugar" programs are available:

  * *continuation-lines* -- allow C-style backslash escaped continuation lines
    in the conf file
  * *keysubdirs-as-groups* -- use the last component of the sub-directory name
    within keydir as a group name
  * **macros** -- simple line-wise macro processor

# triggers

Here's a list of **features** that are enabled by [[triggers]], or a
combination of a trigger and something else, like a command.

  * *Alias* -- allow repos to have aliases
  * *AutoCreate* -- deny auto-create of wild repos on R or RW access
  * *bg* -- allow long running post-compile/post-create jobs to be
    backgrounded
  * *CpuTime* -- CPU and elapsed times for gitolite+git
  * **[Mirroring](mirroring)** -- mirroring all or some repos
  * *Motd* <span class="gray">(v3.6.1+)</span> -- allows printing a message of the day to
    STDERR in ssh mode
  * *[partial-copy][]* -- simulated read control for branches (in combination
    with the partial-copy VREF)
  * *RefexExpr* -- (in combination with VREF/refex-expr) logical expressions
    over refexes, like "refex-1 and not refex-2".  (Example: changing file
    'foo' but not on 'master' branch)
  * *renice* -- renice the git operation
  * *RepoUmask* -- repo-specific umask settings
  * *Shell* -- see "giving shell access to gitolite users" in the [ssh
    troubleshooting and tips](sts) page.  (Internally enables the
    'ssh-authkeys-shell-users' trigger also).
  * *ssh-authkeys-split* -- split pubkey files with multiple keys into
    separate files with one pubkey each
  * *update-description-file* -- if you want the 'description' file to be
    updated instead of the 'gitweb.description' config entry (e.g. cgit users)
  * *upstream* -- manage local, gitolite-controlled, copies of read-only
    upstream repos

In addition, the following post-compile trigger scripts are enabled by
default, so are included here only for completeness and in case you wish to
disable them:

  * ssh-authkeys -- process keys in keydir/ and add/update appropriate lines
    to the authorized keys file
  * update-git-configs -- run `git config` in each repo to add/update entries
    as needed
  * update-git-daemon-access-list -- create/delete the 'git-daemon-export-ok'
    files in each repo as needed
  * update-gitweb-access-list -- create the "projects.list" file that gitweb
    uses to determine what repos to show/not show

[partial-copy]: list-non-core/#partial-copy-selective-read-control-for-branches

# VREFs

VREFs are a complex topic and have their [own page](vref) with lots more
details.  However, here's a list of VREFs shipped with gitolite:

  * *[COUNT][]* -- restrict pushes by number of changed or new files pushed
  * *EMAIL-CHECK* -- check if all new commits are authored by the person pushing
  * *[lock](locking)* -- lock binary files for exclusive use (in combination
    with the 'lock' command)
  * *MAX\_NEWBIN\_SIZE* -- restrict by size of new binary files (helps catch
    people checking in random PDFs, JARs, WARs, etc.)
  * **[NAME][]** -- restrict pushes by dir/file name
  * [partial-copy][] -- simulated read control for branches (in combination
    with the partial-copy trigger)
  * *refex-expr* -- (in combination with the refex-expr trigger) logical
    expressions over refexes, like "refex-1 and not refex-2".  (Example:
    changing file 'foo' but not on 'master' branch)
  * *[VOTES][votes]* -- voting on commits a la gerrit

[COUNT]: vref-2#number-of-changed-or-new-files
[NAME]: vref-2#restricting-pushes-by-dirfile-name
[votes]: vref-2#voting-on-commits

# details on some non-core programs

These non-core programs needed more detail than could be provided in the
source code, but did not fit anywhere else neatly enough.

## partial-copy: selective read control for branches

Git (and therefore gitolite) cannot do selective read control -- allowing
someone to read branch A but not branch B.  It's the entire repo or nothing.

<span class="box-r">Gerrit Code Review can do that, but that is because they have their
own git (as well as their own sshd, and so on).  If code review is part of
your access control decision, you really should consider Gerrit
anyway.</span>

The standard answer you get when you ask is "use separate repos" (where one
contains all the branches, and one contains a subset of the branches).  This
is nice in theory but in practice, when people are potentially *pushing* to
both repos, you need to figure out how to keep them in sync.

Gitolite can now help you do this.  Note that this is only for branches; you
can't do this for files and directories.

Here's how:

1.  enable 'partial-copy' in the ENABLE list in the rc file.

2.  for each repo "foo" which has secret branches that a certain set of
    developers (we'll use a group called `@temp-emp` as an example) are not
    supposed to see, do this:

    ```gitolite
    repo foo
        # rules should allow @temp-emp NO ACCESS

    repo foo-partialcopy-1
        # first, a deny rule that allows no access to secret-branch
        -   secret-branch               =   @all

        # other rules; see notes below

        -   VREF/partial-copy           =   @all
        config gitolite.partialCopyOf   =   foo
    ```

    **IMPORTANT NOTES**:

      * if you're using other VREFs, **make sure** this one is placed at the
        end, after all the others.

      * remember that any change allowed to be made to the partial-copy repo
        will propagate to the main repo so make sure you use other rules to
        restrict pushes to other branches and tags as needed.

And that should be it.  **Please test it and let me know if it doesn't work!**

WARNINGS:

  * If you change the config to disallow something that used to be allowed,
    you should delete the partial repo on the server and then run
    `gitolite compile; gitolite trigger POST_COMPILE` to let it build again.

  * Not tested with smart http; probably won't work.

  * Also not tested with mirroring, or with wild card repos.

