# gitolite options

----

Some gitolite features are enabled, or gitolite's behaviour changed, by
setting "options".

A line like `option foo = 1` is really just syntactic sugar for
`config gitolite-options.foo = 1`, so everything in the [git-config](git-config) page
also applies here (especially the bit about [overriding config
values](git-config#overriding-config-values).

**However**, these values are **not** written into git's own `config` file, so
git (or other programs running `git config`) will not see them.  You can only
query them using `gitolite git-config`, where they will appear in full in the
output.

Options are set by repo.  The syntax is very simple:

    option  foo.bar     =   baz

Of course this is useless if some other part of gitolite, or some external
command, is not querying for the option key 'foo.bar'!

Options are therefore documented in the section/page they belong in, not here.
Here are some examples, although this list is not exhaustive:

  * Ask gitolite to honor [deny rules][deny-rules]  during the pre-git check
    also.

  * Options related to [mirroring](mirroring) -- tell gitolite who is the master server,
    and who are the slaves, for each repo.

  * The optional post-compile trigger `update-gitweb-daemon-from-options`
    allows you to use options instead of special usernames gitweb and daemon
    to determine access for those tools.

  * You can set [repo-specific environment variables][rsev] for triggers and
    hooks to test, which is very useful.

[deny-rules]: conf-2#read-access-respecting-deny-rules
[rsev]: dev-notes#appendix-1-repo-specific-environment-variables

Here's how to disable an option from a single repo if it was enabled earlier
in a group (which you might guess from reading the [git-config](git-config) page):

```gitolite
@g = r1 r2 r3

repo @g
    option gitweb = 1

# but repo r2 should not be accessible by gitweb
repo r2
    option gitweb = ""
```

